Debbie Parks interviewing Mr. Charles W.
Crawford March 24, 1983 for the History of College
Station Project at Mr. Crawford's house.
Alright, I'd like to start with some background on
yourself. Where were you born? I was born in
Benchley, Texas, about ten miles north of
Brownsville. Oh, that's right. I've seen it as
I've driven. Well, are your parents from that same
area? Well, my mother was a Brownsville County
girl. My father was an M.D. At that time, he was
practicing medicine in Wellborn, Texas. And he
and my mother met, and they were married here in
Brownsville County. And so your father was a
doctor then? Yes. Well, I bet there weren't that
many doctors in his time. Well, no, there weren't
very many doctors at that time. He was a son of an old
pioneer in Texas who came to Texas in 1833 and said
he felt that he won his Texas citizenship by
fighting in the Battle of Harrisburg and the
Battle of San Jacinto. So your grandfather fought
in the Texas Revolution? Yes, the Texas
Revolution. Oh, that's wonderful. What kind of
education did you receive? I went to country
school in Harvey, Texas, and then I came into Bryan
and went one year to Bryan Baptist Academy, and
then I went Next year I went to Bryan High School and
finished my high school diploma in Bryan. Then I
came to Texas A&M and graduated from mechanical
engineering in June 24, 1919. That was a class that
almost wasn't. Because of the war? Because of the
war. We started out with 600 students. in the
freshman class and wound up with 57. Oh, no. Well,
were you in World War I then? I was in the service a
very short time, about three months. Okay, after
you got your bachelor's, then you must have gone on
and... I did. I went on and got my master's degree.
In the fall of 1919, I had gone to work for during the
summer for the city of Port Arthur. And I worked as
an instrument man setting levels on some drainage
project down in Port Arthur. And in the fall,
Professor Fermier, head of Mechanical
Engineering Department, wired and offered me a
job. And since my mother and there were two younger
children still in Bryan, And I felt that they
needed me. I accepted the job as an instructor at
Texas A&M, but really didn't expect to stay here
more than a year or two. But it turned out to be 46
years. Well, can you tell me how it developed, what
you became later in the department? My whole
career more or less happened. It wasn't planned. I
came back to A&M, started teaching, and I found
that I liked teaching. And the first sommelier
seemed to like me and think that I was doing a good
job. And so I continued to teach, and I gradually
did graduate work while I was teaching. It was
about 1929, though, before I actually finished my
master's degree. But later on, you became the head
of the department. Well, as the years went along, I
was advanced from assistant professor,
associate professor, and then professor. And in
the fall of 1919, no, I take you back. I didn't mean
the fall of 1919. Fall of 1927, Professor Cramier
died. long about, I believe it was the 27th of
December. And I continued to teach, and a man by the
name of Bliss, Professor W.D. Bliss, came in as
head of the department. And he was a former
professor at Lafayette, head of the mechanical
and chemical engineering department at
Lafayette.
I
can't think of the name of the school now. Not
Lafayette. Is it Tulane? No, it was up in Indiana.
Oh, it's Indiana. But anyway, he had business
interests and the Depression came on and he felt
that he had to go back to his business up there. And
so when he left, why? I was made head of the
department. Is that 1929? 1929. And how long were
you head of the department? Until 1957. 1957. No,
yes, I believe that's right. And then in 1957, I was
made associate dean and remained in that position
until 1962. In 1962, I had reached the age of 65 and
they sent me back to the department and I taught
three more years I believe and finally retired in
1965.
Well I was reading in your book about the early
history of the A&M College and can you tell me about
Who owned the land that the college was
established on and how the college came to be
located where it is? One of the chief men who
influenced the location of A&M where it is today
was named Harvey Mitchell. And Harvey Mitchell
was an old pioneer in this area and he owned a part of
this land, but a Mrs. Rector owned part of it and one
or two other people. But Harvey Mitchell was
instrumental in getting the titles and
purchasing the land to donate to A&M for its
establishment. So he donated the land to the ?
Well, the people that
gave the land, I'm not sure it was entirely a
donation, but I think it was. And there
was three different plots of land. I think he owned
one. Ms. Rector owned one. I don't remember who
owned the other. But between those three, they
gave the major portion of the land for A&M. Did
these people live in Bryan? Live in Bryan, yes. At
this time, College Station was five miles out in
the country, just out in the bleak open wilds. no
houses around in this area at all. It wasn't
anything, is that right? No, plain open land.
Okay, so when A&M was established and you had the
land around the college that later becomes
College Station, was it still just open land? What
was there, if anything? It was nothing here, but
the commission that was appointed by The
governor, after the legislature had passed the
bill creating A&M, was made up of three men, and
they came over and surveyed the land, looked it
over, and I understand that the local citizens
gave them quite a big party. Oh, really? And they
established A&M, or rather chose a site for it, and
then They were allowed such a very little time by
the legislature under the laws to choose a
location and employ an architect to plan the
buildings. And then they were supposed to
get the buildings built and started within 90
days. It was actually about three years before it
actually happened that way. Well, those things
don't happen fast. No, they sure don't. So when the
A&M wasn't established, then this land was fields
and prairies. Was it used for farmland? It was open
range. It was just open farmland. Were you aware of
any Czech settlement in this area? I find a lot of
Czechoslovakian names in this area. No. I don't
think there was any actual settlement. group of
people living around within any closer than
Bryan, which was nearly five miles away.
Did you live on campus housing? I'm aware that the
campus had housing for professors. Did you live in
that housing? I lived on the campus several years.
The house that I lived in originally was up across
the street from the post office and then it was
moved down in the what we called the pecan orchard
at that time and the pecan orchard was right next to
the ASC building which is on the corner of the
campus near the railroad at the present time. The
ASC building? It was Agricultural Stabilization
and Conservation. They've changed the name of it a
time or two, but I don't know exactly what the
present name is. So the house you lived in was moved
to the Pecan? Pecan Orchard, yeah. And was that
considered off campus? No, it was on the campus,
still on the campus. Well, about how many houses
were on campus for professors?
It'd be a guess if I were to say 25 would be, I don't
know, that wouldn't be accurate at all, but that's
about what I... Well, just a round figure is what I
would say. Well, did certain houses, like only
professors rent certain houses? Well, they were
somewhat on the basis of seniority. They had the
houses for the presidents, which was built for
L.S. Ross when he was president of A&M. And then
they had the houses for the deans and had houses for
the full professors and the heads of departments.
And that was more or less when you became eligible
for one. The rents were very nominal. Oh, so it
was... Very nominal. I think I paid $15 to $20 a
month for the house that I lived in. I wish I could
pay that. So basically, around A&M, the community
in its early days... There was no community around
A&M for many years. It was on campus. It was on the
campus. Well, could the university provide all
your needs, such as the utilities and the water and
the sewer? They provided, yes, the electricity.
and the water and the sewer service.
Could you describe the roads or the
transportation system around A&M? Well the road
coming from Bryan was considered a pretty good
road. It was gravel and it wound out from Bryan and
came up by the F&B
station near the northwest corner area and then
came on down what's now known as Wellborn Road into
College Station. That was a gravel road and
considered a pretty fair road at that time. So the
only road to Bryan was where the Wellborn Highway
is now? That's right. It's along by the railroad
until it got up to the F&B Station and then veered
off into the road that now leads into Bryan. Is that
South College? Are you talking about South
College? Yes, South College Avenue. Okay. What
was Jersey or Texas 6 like? Was it just a... What was
what? Jersey, you know where Jersey Street is?
Yes, that was one of the streets. When the campus
began to build up, and that was in, along about
19... the area south of the college began to build
up, and Jersey Street was one of the new streets in
that near addition. That addition was the first
individual housing that was built around,
adjacent to the campus. It happened in the south?
Yes. Were there any houses in the north, around
Northgate area? There were just a few houses that
were up where we called the North Gate, and that's
the present North Gate area.
But there were very, I would say that there were not
more than 10 or 12 houses, 15 houses in that whole
area, north campus. What was Highway 6, our
present Texas Avenue, what was that like? Highway
6 didn't come in for a good many years later. See,
that was the backside of the campus. Oh, it's the
main entrance now. Yes, but
the main entrance to the campus was down at the
railroad station, and there were two railroad
stations, one for the H&TC Railroad, Southern
Pacific, and the other for INGN.
And that was considered the front of the campus.
And from where the present administration
building, system administration building, out
to the present Highway 6 was just all pasture. That
was considered the back pasture.
There was a road leading up from the northwest side
of the campus, which is now, I believe, University
Avenue, goes out by the north gate and went down out
to the present Highway 6. And that Highway 6 was
just a dirt road And that was called Sulphur
Springs Road.
The one that is University today? Yeah.
Is Sulphur Springs? Yes. And was it just a dirt
road? Or was Texas City? The road came out from
Bryan, out that way, and led on down. to the south
and west parallel pretty well where the present
Highway 6 goes out to the Rock Prairie area. And
then Sulphur Springs Road veered off left and went
down into the Navasad Bottom and went to Sulphur
Springs. That was just a dirt road.
I'm not sure where Sulphur Springs is. Where is
that? Is it closer to Bryan or headed out? I believe
at the present time the old Sulphur Springs Road
is,
I can't think of the street now, I can't think of the
street, the name, it's between here and Bryan. I
believe it's still called Sulphur Springs Road.
Uh-huh, there is one. So this street veered off to
that area. Well, it paralleled President
Highway, uh, Railroad, uh, President Railroad,
but it was about a mile further northeast than the
President from the, well, at that time that was
Sulphur Springs Road, which led down into the
country area out in the south, southeast corner of
the present campus. And the present Texas 6 was
just a dirt road, if anything. Yes. That road went
on down to Wellborn and went on down to Navasota and
went through the Brazos Bottom area and came into
Navasota about a mile this side of Navasota, which
turned
left when you're going down and went across the
Navasota River Bridge. That's the present
Navasota River Bridge, which crossed over the
railroad. Oh, I see. Highway 6 was finally
continued on up to College Station after that
former road was still, I think, still used but was
practically abandoned. Oh, is that right? Do you
remember the trolley line? Oh yes, I rode that
trolley many times. Where did that run? How was
that? It came right through my house here. Oh, did
it? Actually, it came out from Ryan to what's
called Hillcrest. And then Hillcrest, the
trolley came on down and crossed this little
branch out here. just where it became Cabot
Avenue. And you see, when it got to this point, to
the point right down, just at the present time,
it's just this side of that Catholic corner, and
crossed the branch, and came right over here, and
went into the campus right in from here about about
where Nagel is at the present time. The street
Nagel is. Actually, it went into campus a little
bit further west than that. Well, when did they
stop using the trolley? I don't remember the date,
but it was,
I expect it must have been
I can remember when I wrote it in 1930. Oh, that
late?
Excuse me. Were you living in a campus house when
the board of directors ordered people to move off
campus, ordered
people to find houses in the area surrounding A&M?
I believe I was. What did you do? Did you buy one of
the houses and move it? To
tell you the truth, I can't quite recall when that
was. Oh yes, I moved to Bryan. I moved to Bryan after
I got married, which was about 1926. Then in 26, I
lived in that location until I
was made head of department. That's when I moved to
campus. And
I simply can't recall when I moved off the campus.
Oh yes, I did. I moved to another house on the
campus, which was down by the old swimming pool,
and lived in that house for several years. And then
about 19...
Can't seem to get my dates very clear in there.
moved off the campus and lived off the campus a year
before I built a house up on the hill in front of
College Station. That big two-story house up on
the hill there was my home where I built it. In which
area though? It's right out in front of the campus,
about half a mile off the campus, up on the hill.
It's on, is it at Eastgate? Across Highway 6. Oh,
it's at Eastgate. Yeah, Eastgate. And I built that
house in 19...
I believe it was 40, a year after I moved off campus.
Was that in College Hills Estate that you built
your house? Well, it was part of College Hills
Estate, yes. I believe that's what they called it.
Okay, do you remember the public school system
that was on campus for a while? Do you remember that
at all? Yes, I remember the building. It was a
stucco, two-story stucco building over in the
area where the core area now is. It's really not
quite, it's almost where the road, the street
coming down by the MSC now makes that bend right at
the area that houses the core. And that's where the
school? Yes, that's where the school building
was. Did any professors at A&M volunteer their
time and teach there? I think maybe that there was a
little bit of that, but Mr. George Wilcox was
superintendent of that school and was a good one
too. And they had a real good school for the time and
they had full-time teachers. I don't remember. I
remember the names of one or two, but Mr. Wilcox I
remember very distinctly because he's such a fine
person. Is he dead now? Yes, he's been dead a good
many years. When your children went to school, did
they go to the one that was on Jersey Street or did
they go on campus? I had one daughter and
she was born while we were living on the campus and
While we were living on the campus, she grew up to
enter school, but by that time they had organized
President
College Station School, Independent School
District, and she went to that school for one or two
years, and then she went to Bryan for several
years, and finally, while we were living up on the
hill, why she went to Bryan and graduated from
Bryan High School. Is there any reason why she went
to Bryan rather than the College Station School? I
don't really remember any. We felt like that Bryan
was an older school system and better
established. I guess I had gone there. That might
have influenced me some.
Can you remember what, before it became a city in
the 30s and the 40s, can you remember what College
Station looked like physically? Any commercial
developments?
There were very little commercial developments.
There was one or two stores at the north gate and
there wasn't anything on the east gate and there
was little development. that was built across
from the campus on the southwest corner of the
campus, south corner, you might say, of the
campus, there were about 10 or 12 of those project
houses, which were two-story wooden frame
buildings in which the men were allowed to live and
they brought most of their food from the farms And
they had those, some of them had cows, brought cows
and chickens. And Dan Russell was the man who was
the head of the project houses. He was a graduate of
Baylor University and was down here for many years
as head of rural sociology department. And there
was a small community area built up right along in
there in the early 30s, which was just south of the
campus, which was along where there was one or two
stores, one or two filling stations. This
happened because of the project housing? Well,
this was just off the campus. The project houses
were on the campus. Oh, I see. Okay. The American
Legion built a little housing, well, built a
two-story building in there I believe it was two
story, I'm not sure of that. But anyway, the
American Legion sponsored that and built that
house to help the students who were members of the,
what? American Legion? No, it wasn't the American
Legion. It was, I can't think of the name of it,
connected with Masonic Lodge. Not the Masons?
Yeah. I don't remember the name of the
organization, but they built the houses because
housing was so badly needed. These were for
students, right? Yes, they were for students. And
you said to, that's on the southwest corner of
campus? Yes. And then you said off of campus in the
south, a rural community? That was across the
present highway. Oh. Well, the Welburn Road runs
parallel to the railroad. This is at right angles,
crosses just beyond the campus, now goes out to the
airport. Okay. That's the main road that goes from
the President, Texas Avenue, right across the
edge of the campus and goes on out to the airport. It
was just across the road there that had this little
commercial development. Okay. I would like to
talk about the incorporation of College Station,
if you remember that. Do you remember when it was
incorporated in 39 and... Well, a real good friend
of mine, professor of mathematics, Dr. John
Binney, was, I believe, the first mayor of College
Station and he was mayor for several years until
Professor Ernest Langford became mayor and after
he became mayor he was mayor for about 20 years.
That's right. And he taught me when I was a freshman
at A&M. Mr. Langford did? Mr. Langford did. He was a
very good friend of mine. Well, do you remember any
of the reasons why the communities around A&M
campus wanted to incorporate into a town? At that
time, the Bryan City Council decided that it was
about time for them to incorporate and include
College Station. And the people who were at
College Station didn't want to be incorporated in
Bryan. So they got together and organized the city
of College Station to keep from being included in
Bryan. Why didn't they want to be included in
Bryan? They just wanted to be independent. You
kind of had a community around the college? At that
time, there were very few houses between Bryan and
College Station. Along the highway, there were
just a few farmhouses. I bet there weren't were the
dozen houses between here and the settlements of
Bryan at that time. And so they wanted to remain
independent.
How did you feel? Do you remember having any
feelings one way or the other about College
Station being incorporated? Well, since I was
living in Bryan and had lived in Bryan, I felt like
it wouldn't be bad for Bryan to go ahead and
incorporate College Station. But a good many of my
friends who had never lived in Bryan, didn't feel
that way. But there's advantages to being
incorporated into an older town. I felt like there
were some, especially the school system. Plus
your services and utilities. Yeah. At that time,
Bryan City Power Plant supplied the electricity
for A&M, except for what was on the campus. A&M had
its own power plant. But the city of College
Station, which grew up around here, was served by
Bryan. Oh. The power plant. Through, I think, REA
lines. No, at that time it was head of REA. REA
hadn't come in at that time. Oh, OK. So houses
around were serviced by Bryan. Yeah. They had an
agreement with Bryan. Brian and them that if one
had trouble that other ones could tie into the same
system so they were could be connected in the case
of emergency.
Do you remember like any publicizing meetings for
incorporation or people who were active and well
of course these are faculty members who would be
active and pushing for Well, most of the men who
were active were members of the A&M faculty, like
Dr. Benny and Mr. Lankford and
Mr. Boyd. Orrin Boyd, I believe, was not Orrin, but
one of the Boyd men. But other members of the
community Part of them were members of the faculty
and part of them were one or two businessmen. That
were interesting. Do you remember Mr., or maybe
the doctor, McNew? Very well. McNew and I were good
friends. He, according to newspaper accounts,
was very interested in seeing the college
incorporated. Yes. He did some engineering work
for the the city of College Station. I don't
remember whether he was city engineer or not, but
he had quite a bit of influence in that group.
Worked with them pretty closely. Do you remember
attending any meetings that talked about the pros
and cons? No, I actually don't. I don't recall a
thing in which I was involved.
Do you remember them, do you even recall them being
held on campus? I was wondering where they were
held. The meeting? Uh-huh. To talk about
incorporation? I really don't know. You don't
know. Okay. Do you happen to know how the board of
directors felt about College Station
incorporating the name? agree or i think don't
think there was any strong feeling but i think they
agreed to it and felt maybe it would be to the best
interest of the university for the college for
them to be incorporated okay
um i think we have a few minutes on this side excuse
me i think i served only two years or maybe four
years but at that time four years at that time why
Mr. Ewing Brown was a member of the council and Mr.
Lloyd Smith a real good friend of mine was city
manager and he had worked at the building and
college utilities for many years before he became
the city manager of College Station. At that time,
the entire staff of the city of College Station
consisted of Lloyd Smith, the city manager, and I
believe one or two secretaries, and that was the
whole group. And practically none of these
streets around College Station paved at that
time. And they did some paving or black-topping,
which was very thin coating of gravel and asphalt,
but it did cut down on the dust and made pretty fast
streets for College Station. But at that time,
they got out and graded the streets, put the
asphalt on it, spread the gravel, and had very
little actual permanent construction, very
light coating of topping. OK. In 1943 is when you
became elected. Why did you decide to run for
office?
It seemed like at about that time that there was a
change made And I guess it was because I was pretty
closely associated with Lloyd Smith and some of
the men on the council, like Ernest Lankford. And
they were all good friends of mine. It seemed at
that time there just was an opening that I felt like
I could fill. And what ward did you represent? I
don't think we worked by wards at that time. I think
it was all just one group. Mr. Langford was
chairman, was the button mayor. Lloyd Smith was
the
city manager. Mr. Ewing Brown was, I believe he was
a chemist, I'm not sure, on the campus. And
Reverend R.L. Brown, who was the Baptist
minister. And there was one or two more men on that,
but I've forgotten who they were. Where did y'all
meet and when? At
that time, they had just built that little
building down next to the railroad, and we met
there in that building. And what nights? Do you
remember? No, I don't remember. Did you meet once a
month or more often? I think we met more often than
that because we were more or less planning things
that We're very informal about it. I don't imagine
we kept a very complete set of minutes even. It was
very informal and just a matter of getting
together and discussing our problems and
deciding on what we'd better do, but it was very
informal. Very informal?
Yeah, very. Did many citizens attend the
meetings? Did they come and talk about what they
needed done? I don't remember a single case in
which any committee or group waited on us and
wanted to have a presented problem. Really? So
basically it was just the councilmen getting
together and talking about what should be done?
That's right, as I remember it. Okay. At this
point, do you remember how closely associated the
council was to operations at A&M? Did they confer a
lot with the board of directors? Very little. I
think that they knew what was going on, kept up with
what was going on, but as far as the board of
directors were concerned, there was very little
participation in any way with the College Station
City Council. Did College Station want to be able
to be a city on its own and not depend on A&M? Yes. I
think they felt that after the city was organized
that they could go right ahead and operate
independently of the College Station Board of
Directors, A&M College Board of Directors. But
were the relationship pretty amiable, though?
Very amiable. We seemed to have complete
cooperation between the staff and the board of
directors and the city council. After all, nearly
all those people were members of the A&M faculty.